+++
date = "2015-12-27"
title = "Ojai to Thailand via West Coast: Days 1-11"
image = "travel/2016/1453310823365.jpg"
+++

12/17/15-12/27/16

I had no idea when I started this journey that I would take up travel-logging.  My firsts posts are sparse, merely captions for a few photos.  But as I dropped into the wandering and the vast space of time, I began to record more and more.  The immediate and supportive responses from back home (thanks to Facebook) certainly encouraged me.

Departure, the mornign of December 17th, the so-called Shebi Arus ("wedding night") celebrating Jelaluddin Rumi's matriculation into the next world.  A good time to hit the road...

Goodbye, precious Ojai! I love you. See you in May!

Day 1: Ojai past Land of the Medicine Buddha, Soquel CA

Day 2 of my five month journey. Lovely bright Zaozao was my Airbnb host in San Francisco. Ganganath and his partner Tara (who I didn't manage to photograph) offered tea and enlightening stories from their little apartment in Mt Shasta - while the snow fell outside.

Day 3 of 150. Synchrodestinous connections in Ashland...

Day 4/150: from Portland up the mighty Columbia to Leavenworth WA

Day 5/150... Balmy Leavenworth WA with the grandkids

Day 6/150. Toward festivities and projects.

Day 9/150: Christmas & departure...

Days 10-11/150: traveling. A fairly short trip... 😊

11 hours from Seattle to Taiwan
1 hour layover
4 hours from Taiwan to Bangkok
3 hour layover:
Enough time for immigration, customs,
Lose the winter clothes, get a foot massage
1 hour from Bangkok to Krabi
5 hours to Koh Lanta (should have been 2!)

Total 25 hours + 18 hour time change , 1am Saturday to 8pm Sunday

Arrived to the welcoming arms of Marilyn Ryan and Jesse Ryan at Chill Out House. Moved in, had a coconut shake and massaman curry on the beach followed by a full night's sleep. Ahhh!
